
This directory contains patches and support files necessary for
modifying a "stock" OME installation to provide support for viewing
annotated images in a tabular format. 

The files do not provide a complete, turn-key installation, as the
actual image data is not included. Furthermore, production deployments
will likely require refinements of the data model and/or layouts as
necesary for specific needs. 

The main components of this functionality include:

    1) The use of ImageAnnotationTable.pm to display annotated images
    in a 2d grid. 
    2) GeneStageAnnotator and ImageDetailAnnotator as modules for
    creating annotations.
    3) ImageAnnotationDetail for showing specific information about
    each image.

Each of these tools is driven by a set of data types as given in
src/xml/OME/Annotations/MouseAnnotations.ome.

Details of the implementation, configuration, and use of these tools can be
found  on the OME Wiki:
http://cvs.openmicroscopy.org.uk/tiki/tiki-index.php?page=NIA+Annotation+and+Viewing+Tools


There are four files in this directory that can be used to modify an
installation to provide this functionality:

   1) dgas-patch.pl installs the types and values in
      MouseAnnotations.ome,  configures the system to allow guest
      access, modifies headers and menus, imports images in a specific
      directory, and annotates those images with the contents of a
      spreadsheet file.
   2) dgas.xls contains the image annotations in a spreadsheet form.
   3) nih1.jpg and
   4) nia1.jpg are images used in the modified header.


Customizations of this functionality should probably begin with the
definition of a data model. This model should be instantiated in an
OME-XML file which would take the place of
MouseAnnotations.ome. A corresponding annotation spreadsheet,
containing instances of types from the newly-defined data model, must
also be built. Appropriate images should be provided if desired, and
changes to OME::Web::TableBrowse::HeaderBuilder (or a new header
builder file) should be made to provide the desired page header. Once
these changes are made, a new patch file based on dgas-patch.pl should
be written. This new patch file will point to any revised file names
and will modify the details of the annotation imports to account for
the new model.

There are three  types of functionality that are not covered by the
script and annotation files in this directory: category groups,
publications, and a home page for guest users.

The tabular image display supports color-coding images based on their
categorization within a specified category group. The stock OME
facility includes definition of the CategoryGroup and Category
semantic types, but the patches given here do not instantiate any
category groups or categories, so no annotations are given. These 
objects can be imported, or created through the web page. Individual
images can be categorized with the web interface, but creation of a
new AnnotationTeplate referring to appropriate category groups might
be needed. 

The other functionality that is not supported by these patches
involves publications. The ImageAnnotationDetail display has the
ability to display publications associated with an image via the
Publication and ImagePublication types defined in
MouseAnnotations.ome. If this data is added into the system (again,
via import or other means), it will be displayed as appropriate on
image detail pages.

The patch script configures OME to be usable by non-authenticated
users in a guest mode. As this will involve limited functionality, the
patch provides guests with a display that does not include the usual
menu bar.  Access to the home page is also unavailable to guest users.
Thus, appropriate entry points for guest users must be defined after
this patch is installed. Usually, these access points will be URLs
that invoke gene-specific instances of the ImageAnnotationTable
display. In any case, links can point to OME::Web::Login to allow
authorized users to login and access full functionality.

